docs/build-system.md, before:

# Build System

## Overview

Seraph uses Cargo as its build system, with shell scripts providing convenience
wrappers for cross-compilation, QEMU invocation, and artifact management. The
build system supports two target architectures (x86-64 and RISC-V RV64GC) from
a single source tree.

---

## Toolchain

Seraph requires Rust nightly, pinned in `rust-toolchain.toml`. The following
components must be installed:

| Component | Purpose |
|---|---|
| `rust-src` | Required for `-Zbuild-std` (rebuilds `core`/`alloc` for custom targets) |
| `rustfmt` | Code formatting |
| `clippy` | Linting |
| `llvm-tools` | `llvm-objcopy`, `llvm-objdump`, symbol map utilities |

Run `rustup show` in the repository root to confirm the toolchain is active.

---

## Workspace Structure

The repository is a Cargo virtual workspace. Each component is a workspace member
with its own `Cargo.toml`. Components targeting different compilation targets are
separate crates; types shared between them are extracted into library crates.

```
Cargo.toml                    # Virtual workspace root
├── kernel/                   # Microkernel (no_std; custom target)
├── boot/
│   ├── protocol/             # Shared BootInfo types (no_std lib)
│   └── loader/               # UEFI bootloader application (no_std)
└── (future)
    ├── init/
    ├── devmgr/
    └── drivers/
```

`boot/protocol` is a `#![no_std]` library containing the `BootInfo` structure
and associated types. Both `boot/loader` and `kernel` depend on it. This crate
is the single source of truth for the boot protocol ABI; the design is specified
in [`docs/boot-protocol.md`](boot-protocol.md).

---

## Custom Targets

The kernel cannot be compiled with standard Rust targets because it requires
specific hardware configuration: no red zone, no SSE/AVX before explicit
initialisation, and the kernel code model for higher-half placement.

Custom target JSON specifications live in `scripts/targets/`:

| File | Architecture | Key properties |
|---|---|---|
| `x86_64-seraph-none.json` | x86-64 | Red zone off, SSE/AVX/MMX off, soft-float, kernel code model |
| `riscv64gc-seraph-none.json` | RISC-V | RV64GC features, medium code model, lp64d ABI |

Both targets set `panic-strategy: abort` and link with `rust-lld`.

The bootloader uses built-in Rust targets (`x86_64-unknown-uefi` for x86-64),
so no custom JSON is needed for it.

Custom targets require `-Zbuild-std=core,alloc,compiler_builtins` to rebuild
the standard library from source. This is passed explicitly by the build scripts
rather than via `.cargo/config.toml`, to avoid interfering with `cargo test`
(which builds for the host target and does not need `build-std`).

---

## Build Output: the Sysroot

Build artifacts are staged in `sysroot/`, which is used directly as a virtual
FAT drive by QEMU. The sysroot is built for one architecture at a time; the
active architecture is recorded in `sysroot/.arch`. Switching architectures
requires a clean rebuild.

```
sysroot/
  .arch                  # "x86_64" or "riscv64"
  EFI/
    BOOT/
      BOOTX64.EFI        # UEFI fallback bootloader path (x86-64)
    seraph/
      seraph-kernel      # Kernel ELF binary
  etc/                   # (future) System configuration
  lib/                   # (future) Shared libraries
```

The UEFI firmware (OVMF) discovers the bootloader at `EFI/BOOT/BOOTX64.EFI`
(the UEFI specification's fallback boot path). The kernel lives alongside it
under `EFI/seraph/`, the Seraph vendor directory within the EFI partition. This
arrangement mirrors real deployments: when the system eventually has a separate
EFI System Partition and additional mounted filesystems, both the bootloader and
the kernel remain on the ESP where the firmware can reach them.

No temporary copies or image construction steps are needed — `run.sh` passes the
sysroot directory directly to QEMU's `fat:rw:` drive parameter.

Cargo's own `target/` directory contains intermediate compilation artifacts and
is not part of the sysroot.

---

## Convenience Scripts

Three scripts at the repository root provide the primary developer interface.
They are thin wrappers over `cargo`; the shared logic lives in `scripts/env.sh`.

| Script | Purpose |
|---|---|
| `build.sh` | Build components and populate the sysroot |
| `clean.sh` | Remove the sysroot (and optionally `target/`) |
| `run.sh` | Build and launch under QEMU |

See [`scripts/README.md`](../scripts/README.md) for full usage documentation.

---

## QEMU and Firmware

Seraph boots via its own UEFI bootloader on both architectures. This requires
UEFI firmware in QEMU — SeaBIOS cannot load UEFI applications.

**x86-64:** Requires OVMF from `edk2-ovmf`. `run.sh` searches standard Fedora
install paths. The bootloader `.efi` is exposed to QEMU via a virtual FAT image
(QEMU's `fat:rw:DIR` syntax), which OVMF reads like a real FAT partition.

**RISC-V:** Requires `edk2-riscv64` firmware. Not yet implemented; `run.sh`
exits with an error until the RISC-V bootloader target is determined.

---

## Testing

See the Testing section in [`coding-standards.md`](coding-standards.md) for
conventions and requirements. Kernel unit tests run on the host via `cargo test`;
hardware-dependent integration tests run under QEMU (not yet implemented).

---

## Future: xtask

When the build becomes complex enough to require disk image assembly, multi-stage
builds, or integration test orchestration, the shell scripts will be supplemented
or replaced by a `cargo xtask` pattern — a Rust program in `xtask/` that provides
the same interface but with the full expressive power of Rust for build logic.

Commit message:

Update docs, build system, and add tooling config
Revise architecture, boot-protocol, coding-standards, capability-model,
IPC, and build-system docs to reflect current implementation. Update
boot/docs to match implemented ten-step sequence. Expand build.sh with
multi-arch support and run.sh with QEMU launch improvements. Add
rustfmt.toml, .editorconfig, .clang-format for consistent formatting.
Remove module-level CLAUDE.md files (consolidated into project CLAUDE.md).

docs/build-system.md, after:

# Build System

## Overview

Seraph uses Cargo as its build system, with shell scripts providing convenience
wrappers for cross-compilation, QEMU invocation, and artifact management. The
build system supports two target architectures (x86-64 and RISC-V RV64GC) from
a single source tree.

---

## Toolchain

Seraph requires Rust nightly, pinned in `rust-toolchain.toml`. The following
components must be installed:

| Component | Purpose |
|---|---|
| `rust-src` | Required for `-Zbuild-std` (rebuilds `core`/`alloc` for custom targets) |
| `rustfmt` | Code formatting |
| `clippy` | Linting |
| `llvm-tools` | `llvm-objcopy`, `llvm-objdump`, symbol map utilities |

Run `rustup show` in the repository root to confirm the toolchain is active.

---

## Workspace Structure

The repository is a Cargo virtual workspace. Each component is a workspace member
with its own `Cargo.toml`. Components targeting different compilation targets are
separate crates; types shared between them are extracted into library crates.

```
Cargo.toml                    # Virtual workspace root
├── kernel/                   # Microkernel (no_std; custom target)
├── boot/
│   ├── protocol/             # Shared BootInfo types (no_std lib)
│   └── loader/               # UEFI bootloader application (no_std)
└── (future)
    ├── init/
    ├── devmgr/
    └── drivers/
```

`boot/protocol` is a `#![no_std]` library containing the `BootInfo` structure
and associated types. Both `boot/loader` and `kernel` depend on it. This crate
is the single source of truth for the boot protocol ABI; the design is specified
in [`docs/boot-protocol.md`](boot-protocol.md).

---

## Custom Targets

The kernel cannot be compiled with standard Rust targets because it requires
specific hardware configuration: no red zone, no SSE/AVX before explicit
initialisation, and the kernel code model for higher-half placement.

Custom target JSON specifications live in `scripts/targets/`:

| File | Architecture | Key properties |
|---|---|---|
| `x86_64-seraph-none.json` | x86-64 | Red zone off, SSE/AVX/MMX off, soft-float, kernel code model |
| `riscv64gc-seraph-none.json` | RISC-V | RV64GC features, medium code model, lp64d ABI |

Both targets set `panic-strategy: abort` and link with `rust-lld`.

The bootloader uses built-in Rust targets (`x86_64-unknown-uefi` for x86-64),
so no custom JSON is needed for it.

Custom targets require `-Zbuild-std=core,alloc,compiler_builtins` to rebuild
the standard library from source. This is passed explicitly by the build scripts
rather than via `.cargo/config.toml`, to avoid interfering with `cargo test`
(which builds for the host target and does not need `build-std`).

---

## Build Output: the Sysroot

Build artifacts are staged in `sysroot/`, which is used directly as a virtual
FAT drive by QEMU. The sysroot is built for one architecture at a time; the
active architecture is recorded in `sysroot/.arch`. Switching architectures
requires a clean rebuild.

```
sysroot/
  .arch                  # "x86_64" or "riscv64"
  efi/
    BOOT/
      BOOTX64.EFI        # UEFI fallback bootloader path (x86-64)
    seraph/
      seraph-kernel      # Kernel ELF binary
  conf/                  # (future) System configuration
  lib/                   # (future) Shared libraries
```

The UEFI firmware (OVMF) discovers the bootloader at `EFI/BOOT/BOOTX64.EFI`
(the UEFI specification's fallback boot path). The kernel lives alongside it
under `EFI/seraph/`, the Seraph vendor directory within the EFI partition. This
arrangement mirrors real deployments: when the system eventually has a separate
EFI System Partition and additional mounted filesystems, both the bootloader and
the kernel remain on the ESP where the firmware can reach them.

No temporary copies or image construction steps are needed — `run.sh` passes the
sysroot directory directly to QEMU's `fat:rw:` drive parameter.

Cargo's own `target/` directory contains intermediate compilation artifacts and
is not part of the sysroot.

---

## Convenience Scripts

Three scripts at the repository root provide the primary developer interface.
They are thin wrappers over `cargo`; the shared logic lives in `scripts/env.sh`.

| Script | Purpose |
|---|---|
| `build.sh` | Build components and populate the sysroot |
| `clean.sh` | Remove the sysroot (and optionally `target/`) |
| `run.sh` | Build and launch under QEMU |

See [`scripts/README.md`](../scripts/README.md) for full usage documentation.

---

## QEMU and Firmware

Seraph boots via its own UEFI bootloader on both architectures. This requires
UEFI firmware in QEMU — SeaBIOS cannot load UEFI applications.

**x86-64:** Requires OVMF from `edk2-ovmf`. `run.sh` searches standard Fedora
install paths. The bootloader `.efi` is exposed to QEMU via a virtual FAT image
(QEMU's `fat:rw:DIR` syntax), which OVMF reads like a real FAT partition.

**RISC-V:** Requires `edk2-riscv64` firmware. Not yet implemented; `run.sh`
exits with an error until the RISC-V bootloader target is determined.

---

## Testing

### Kernel Testing Strategy

**Host unit tests** — Pure algorithmic modules (buddy allocator, slab allocator, capability
tree, scheduler run queues) keep hardware dependencies behind trait boundaries. The kernel's
`lib` target uses `#![cfg_attr(not(test), no_std)]`, allowing `cargo test -p seraph-kernel`
to run these modules on the host under the standard test harness.

**QEMU integration tests** — Code requiring real hardware (page tables, interrupts, context
switching) is tested under QEMU with a custom harness that runs tests sequentially and reports
results over serial. This harness will be implemented when arch code is written.

### Running Tests

```sh
cargo test -p seraph-kernel  # host unit tests
```

For test naming conventions and requirements (what must be tested, what should not), see
[coding-standards.md](coding-standards.md#testing).

---

## Future: xtask

When the build becomes complex enough to require disk image assembly, multi-stage
builds, or integration test orchestration, the shell scripts will be supplemented
or replaced by a `cargo xtask` pattern — a Rust program in `xtask/` that provides
the same interface but with the full expressive power of Rust for build logic.
